Packaging the Ruby-on-Rails blog example application
====================================================

The Ruby-on-Rails site ``rubyonrails.org`` uses a simple
`blog application <http://guides.rubyonrails.org/getting_started.html>`_ to teach developers
how to get started with RoR. We have taken this blog application, packaged it for UBOS,
and documented the process in this section. As it follows the standard RoR conventions,
packaging other RoR apps for UBOS should be very similar.

In this example, we have chosen MySQL as the production database, and Passenger as the
application server that connects Apache to our application. We package all required
gems into the package, so the :term:`App` only depends on UBOS to provide `ruby` and `ruby-bundler`
and no other gems.

To obtain the source code:

.. code-block:: none

   % git clone https://github.com/uboslinux/ubos-toyapps

Go to subdirectory ``ruby-rails-blog``.

Following the tutorial
----------------------

On our development machine (see also :doc:`here <../setting-up-development-machine>`), we
first installed the required tools from Arch:

.. code-block:: none

   % sudo pacman -S ruby ruby-bundler
   % gem install rails

Then, we followed the
`tutorial <http://guides.rubyonrails.org/getting_started.html>`_
on the ``rubyonrails.org`` site as written, with only one difference: we used
``ruby-rails-blog`` as the name of the application, not just ``blog``.

This produced the following top-level files and directories:

.. code-block:: none

   .gitignore
   config.ru
   Gemfile
   Gemfile.lock
   package.json
   Rakefile
   README.me
   app/
   bin/
   config/
   db/
   lib/
   log/
   public/
   test/
   tmp/
   vendor/

Most Ruby-on-Rails applications should start out with a very similar structure, and so
the additions to be made for UBOS should be very similar to the ones described below.

Modifications to the existing project files
-------------------------------------------

There are only two:

Gemfile modifications
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In production, we want to use a database other than the default sqlite. We choose MySQL.
So we add the following section to the Gemfile:

.. code-block:: ruby

   group :production do
     gem 'mysql2'
   end

.gitignore modifications
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We don't want to check in things that will be regenerated by the build, so we add
these lines to the ``.gitignore`` file:

.. code-block:: none

   public/assets/
   ruby-rails-blog-*.pkg*

The latter is the name of the package being generated for UBOS, with wildcards for the
version numbers and package compression that may easily change.

New file additions
------------------

UBOS needs the following additions:

* ``PKGBUILD``: defines how the UBOS package is being put together;
* ``ubos-manifest.json``: metadata that allows UBOS to provision databases, configure
  web servers, directories and the like when the :term:`App` is deployed to a device;
* ``appicons/``: a directory with two image files that will be used when an icon for the
  :term:`App` needs to be shown to the user;
* ``tmpl/database.yml.tmpl``: the template for the ``database.yml`` file generated during
  deployment of the :term:`App` that will contain database information specifically for this
  installation of the :term:`App`;
* ``tmpl/htaccess.tmpl``: the template for the Apache config file fragment that configures
  Apache and Passenger for our application.

The organization in these files and directories is by UBOS convention; however, with suitable
modifications to the ``PKGBUILD`` file, any other organization is possible.

While you read the discussion below, you may want to open the content of these files
and follow along.

About ``PKGBUILD``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``PKGBUILD`` is a bash script, invoked by ``makepkg`` when building the UBOS package.

It defines some variables to identify the developer of the :term:`App`, the name and version of the
package, the license of the :term:`App` and the like. It also identifies package dependencies.
The only dependency here is on UBOS package ``ubos-rails-support``, which bundles a few
useful scripts for deploying RoR apps on UBOS.

The ``build()`` function is invoked by ``makepkg`` to build what needs building before
the package is assembled. This invokes the familiar rails commands:

.. code-block:: none

  RAILS_ENV=production bin/bundle install --deployment --without development test
  RAILS_ENV=production bin/rails assets:precompile db:migrate

``${startdir}`` refers to the project's top-level directory.

In the ``package()`` function, we copy the files we want to package up into a directory
hierarchy (starting at ``${pkgdir}``) which ``makepkg`` will tar up for us.

* You can see that the UBOS manifest and the icons need to be in particular places, so
  UBOS can find them.
* We will use a subdirectory of the UBOS "data" directory (``${pkgdir}/ubos/lib/${pkgname}``,
  which will expand to ``/ubos/lib/ruby-rails-blog`` at installation time) to put together
  the run-time directory structure that Passenger will work on. Here, we only need to
  create the directory; it will be populated not upon installation of the package, but
  every time an :term:`App` is deployed at a unique :term:`Site` and context path based on the information
  in the UBOS manifest.
* Then we carefully pick and choose which of the files on our development machine we
  actually want to have in the package. There is no need to ship more files than needed.
  This is performed by the list of files and directories, which then is copied recursively
  to below ``${pkgdir}/ubos/share/${pkgname}/`` (expanded to ``/ubos/share/ruby-rails-blog``
  on the target device).
* Finally, we create a directory below ``/var/log/ruby-rails-blog`` that will be the
  parent directory for the Rails log files.

About ``ubos-manifest.json``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The UBOS manifest for this :term:`App` captures the essence of the way the :term:`App` is deployed
on UBOS. Let's go through it step by step:

* The type of this package is ``app`` (not ``accessory``).
* This :term:`App` can only be deployed to the root of a :term:`Site` (``fixedcontext`` is empty).
  As it seems, most RoR apps make this assumption and so we go with it in order to
  avoid having to make substantive changes to the :term:`App` we package. Your :term:`Apps <App>`, if at all
  possible, should allow user-picked context paths, so the user can run your :term:`App` in
  addition to other :term:`Apps <App>` on the same :term:`Site`.
* When run under Apache, the package ``passenger`` must be installed, and the
  Apache module ``passenger`` must have been activated. UBOS will make sure of both
  before deploying the :term:`App`.

There are a number of AppConfigItems, i.e. items that need to provisioned for each
instance of this :term:`App` deployed to a device:

* The file ``tmpl/htaccess.tmpl`` (discussed below) needs to be copied to the place
  where Apache expect it (refered to by symbolic name), after contained variables have
  been replaced with the values for this deployment.
* This :term:`AppConfiguration`'s data directory must have been created. The symbolic name
  ``${appconfig.datadir}`` will expand to ``/ubos/lib/ruby-rails-blog/aXXXX`` where
  ``aXXXX`` is a unique identifier for this particular :term:`AppConfiguration`. This enables
  multiple deployments of the same :term:`App` to coexist on the same device.
* Below that data directory, we create another directory called ``approot``, to which
  we will direct Passenger through the Apache config file (discussed below). This directory
  is strictly not necessary, but good practice, in case we have a need for other,
  :term:`AppConfiguration`-specific data in the future (say uploaded files).
* Into this ``approot`` directory, we now recursively copy, preserving file and
  directory permissions, the files and directories that Passenger needs to run.
* After that, we invoke utility script ``setup-logging`` from the ``ubos-ruby-support``
  package. This will simply make sure that directory ``/var/log/ruby-rails-blog/aXXXX``
  exists and contains a writable file ``production.log``. This is a script, rather
  than a file or directory AppConfigItem, because we don't want to delete the directory
  once the :term:`App` is undeployed.
* We create a symbolic link to that log directory from the ``approot`` directory, so
  RoR can find its log file.
* Finally, we copy the ``database.yml`` file into its place after replacing contained
  variables (see also below).

Now to SQL:

* We need a database for this :term:`App`, whose symbolic name is ``maindb`` (this is the name
  by which we refer to it in the template files below). This database contains valuable
  data -- the :term:`App`'s blog posts and comments -- and thus we specify a ``retentionpolicy``
  and a ``retentionbucket``. UBOS backup and restore will thus save and restore that
  data. Because Rails likes to make schema changes itself when ``db::migrate`` is run,
  the database user automatically provisioned for this database will have
  ``all privileges``.
* When the :term:`App` is first deployed, and every time it is updated after initial deployment,
  we need to run the Rails ``db::migrate`` task. To make this easy, ``ubos-rails-support``
  provides a script called ``db-migrate`` that does this. It is specified in both
  the ``installers`` (when first deployed) and ``updaters`` (susequently) sections.

And finally, there are two customization points. They are marked as ``private``, so they
won't be shown to any user other than ``root`` on the device, and they are being
automatically initialized to a random 128-character hex number upon first deployment.
These are used as the secrets for environment variables ``RAILS_MASTER_KEY`` and
``SECRET_KEY_BASE`` passed to the application (see Apache config file below). We declare
those as customization points, so it is possible for the user to specify their own
values. This will also cause them to be backed up and restored. No point in database backups
that contain encrypted information whose keys have not been backed up ...

About ``appicons/``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This directory contains two PNG files, at 72 and 144 pixels square, respectively,
containing the icon of the :term:`App`. We made one up for this purpose.

About ``database.yml.tmpl``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This file is a typical RoR ``database.yml`` file, but instead of hardcoding database
names, credentials and connection information, it contains variables that will be replaced
by UBOS at deployment time.

For example, ``${appconfig.mysql.dbname.maindb}`` will be replaced by the name of the MySQL
database that UBOS picked for a particular deployment of this :term:`App`. This makes it easily
possible to run multiple instances of the same web :term:`App` on the same device, for example
at different virtual hostnames.

Here, we use variables for database name, database user, database user password and
the hostname for the database.

About ``htaccess.tmpl``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similarly to ``database.yml.tmpl``, ``htaccess.tmpl`` is a template file for an
Apache web server configuration fragment whose contained variables will be replaced by
UBOS at deployment time.

Variable ``${appconfig.apache2.dir}`` refers to the top-level Apache directory that
maps to the hostname and context path picked by the user when deploying this :term:`App` (think
of it as the Apache Docroot for this virtual host, or a subdirectory if not installed
at the root of the :term:`Site`).

However, we point Passenger to ``${appconfig.datadir}/approot`` as the place where it
finds the Rails :term:`App`, as discussed above. We run Passenger as user and group ``http``,
like the Apache web server itself, to make it easier for :term:`Sites <Site>` that use a mix of
RoR and other types of applications.

Finally, we pass the values of the customizationpoints ``railsmasterkey`` and
``secretkeybase`` to Passenger by means of environment variables. These environmnent
variables can then be picked up by the application, and we don't need to change the
Rails defaults (obviously this could be done differently).


Building and running the App on UBOS
------------------------------------

On the development machine, change to the project's root directory (that contains the
``PKGBUILD``) and execute:

.. code-block:: none

  % makepkg

This will create the package file ``ruby-rails-blog-0.1-1-any.pkg.tar.xz``.

Transfer this package file to your UBOS device using any way you like. Then, install
the package there:

.. code-block:: none

   % sudo pacman -U ruby-rails-blog-0.1-1-any.pkg.tar.xz

Now you are ready to create a website that runs the application. Execute:

.. code-block:: none

   % sudo ubos-admin createsite

and answer the questions. When asked for the name of the application to install,
enter ``ruby-rails-blog``. Make sure that your DNS setup is consistent with the name of
the :term:`Site` (or use ``*`` as the name of the :term:`Site`). Once the command is finished, your
:term:`Site` is accessible with a web browser at the hostname specified.

